so for this presentation I'm going to
talk about Hawking stars named after the
great man Steven
Hawking back in
1971 he produced a prediction in a paper
suggesting that our son might Harbor a
black hole in the
center amazing
idea and the reason for this was he was
concerned about strange particles called
neutrinos what's a neutrino well
neutrinos were predicted by Wolf Gang py
in the 1930s the name means little
neutral one what he had and other
scientists had noted was that
radioactive decay of larger nuclei could
spit out electrons or even anti-
electrons positrons
and that the electrons emerged not with
a specific energy but with a range of
energy and a range of
momentum and this was curious because uh
the Nu they could measure how much the
nucleus recoiled and how much the
electron moved and work out what where
the energy was going and it seemed that
energy was not being conserved neither
was linear momentum the speed of the
electron and its mass carrying the
momentum away from the system seemed to
vary too much and if you added the
momentum and energy of the electron to
that of the recoiling nucleus it didn't
seem to match
up so poy suggested that there was
another unseen particle emerging
carrying away some of that momentum some
of that energy out of the system and
that the split between the new particle
which he called the neutrino or indeed
the anti-neutrino for its
antimatter corresponding particle
would between it and the electrons
divide the energy and momentum up in
different ways and so you would see part
of the energy up to a maximum carried by
the electron component whereas the
neutrino would be carrying away the rest
if the uh split was more
equal and so 19 30 for the prediction
but this was not actually proven right
up until the
1960s um so 30 years between prediction
and um the disc uh discovery of it and
the proof in fact this is a photograph
from just 1970 40 years after the
prediction of a neutrino track well it's
not really the neutrino because
neutrinos are notorious for being very
very weak inter interactors with
ordinary matter um they passed through
it but here what's happened is that a
neutrino has come in from the right hand
side collided with a proton kicked the
proton off on the upper
track a pi Mison has been released on
the lower track and a mu Mison a muon
carried away at high speed carrying away
a lot of the uh momentum and energy
there so three particles apparently
emerging from nothing and it was the
invisible neutrino coming in that caused
it now we think that these are released
in the process of nuclear fusion as well
as in the splitting of heavier elements
so when two protons combine in the
nuclear fusion process in the middle of
a star they combine together to form a
heavy hydrogen nucleus a duum nucleus
with one Neutron and one proton and one
of the protons being converted from
positively charged into a neutral
neutron has to get rid of its positive
charge that comes away as an
anti-electron A positron and a neutrino
is also released as well carrying some
of the momentum and in fact balancing
something called the lepton number an
anti-electron would be minus one on the
lepton number scale and the neutrino +
one leaving zero as a
balance so when where we see nuclear
fusion inside Stars we should see a
emerging flux of these neutrinos and if
we can trap them and calculate U how
many nuclear fusion reactions we see we
should know how many neutrinos to expect
if we could detect them now as I said
they're very very difficult to detect
they are neutral they don't carry the
electric charge so they don't interact
through the electromagnetic force at all
all in fact they only interact by the
weak nuclear force in these reactions
and they have a little bit of mass so
they interact with gravity but that's
very very tiny so very very hard to
detect them that way so really we're
looking at uh this weak nuclear force
being the only way to trap them and for
that they need to collide with another
nucleus another proton and uh or another
Neutron and interact with it and that
weakly nuclear force is very um aply
named it's so weak that it been
calculated that your average neutrino
could pass through a wall of lead three
and a half thousand light years thick
before it stood a good chance of bumping
into and interacting with a nucleus
that's very rare
indeed so if you're going to trap them
and detect them at all you need very
sensitive methods and you also need a
very large detector and a very large
source of them well we've got one the
sun producing this large stream of
neutrinos so in the 1960s the home steak
experiment was built by uh a researcher
called Davis a great big tank full of
cleaning fluid per chloro ethane so it's
a C2 cl6 a lot of chlorine atoms in
there held together by a pair of carbon
as this cleaning fluid in this enormous
tank and what they were looking for was
the chlorine atoms occasionally being
bumped into in the nucleus by one of
these
neutrinos and that would turn the
chlorine atom it would turn it into an
argon atom now argon is an inner noble
gas and it wouldn't stick to the carbon
molecule anymore and so it would turn
into a gas and very slowly bubble up
through the fluid and collect as a gas
at the top of the tank and by flushing
the tank
through with uh um a neutral gas like
helium you could bring all of that uh
argon out and collect the Argon and
count how many argon atoms had formed as
a result the only place they could have
come from is the chlorine and this was a
measure therefore of the neutrons and
this they did this and it worked and it
detected
neutrinos as a result unfortunately it
didn't match the theory and this is a
common story that we get with science
where new things are discovered because
Theory and experiment don't match and
here the difference was a factor of
three there were onethird as many
neutrinos as expected from the
calculation
of the power output and the rate of
fusion in the
Sun so Steven Hawking came up with a
potential solution to this so-called
solar neutrino problem he reasoned that
maybe Fusion wasn't the only source of
energy that was powering the sun maybe
there was something else going on and
that uh 2third of the energy budget of
the sun perhaps was coming from this
other
source and that Source could be a black
hole sat at the center of the sun
invisible to us because of the overlying
layers of the Sun the black hole
wouldn't be very large it' be quite a
small object and it would be generating
energy because of its gravitational
power being able to bring infalling
material towards it accreting onto it
and releasing the gravitational
potential energy as it fell towards and
into the black hole and that energy
would power the sun power at least 2/3
of the energy budget and that would
explain why we were only seeing onethird
of the amount of nuclear
fusion that is a really interesting idea
and uh such stars are called Hawking
stars and we'll look to see a bit more
about them in a moment but first we need
to understand just a little bit more
about what was discovered about these
ghostly
neutrinos the first thing that was
realized was that in fact the electron
has two heavier cousins the muon and the
taon and these are I think the muon is
200 times heavier than the electron and
the taon a thousand times heavier or
more and each of these has an associated
neutrino so when an electron is created
you have to create an electron
anti-neutrino to balance it out if you
create an anti-electron you create an
electron neutrino if you create a muon
or a toon you have to create the
corresponding
neutrino of their individual flavor so
we have these three different flavors of
electron and three different flavors of
neutrino particles and the neutrinos
have the Greek letter new which looks
like a V there it's the Greek letter new
and we donate them as new e new mu and a
new tow for the three different
flavors now if neutrinos as was
originally thought had no mass at all
absolutely precisely zero um and move
moved at the speed of light and behaved
much more perhaps like a photon um of
light in that respect with zero rest
Mass this wouldn't really wouldn't work
and so the idea was that in fact they
all have small very small masses much
lighter than an electron but that each
of these types of neutrinos has a
different mass and that turns out to be
very interesting from the point of view
of the theory of this standard model of
particle physics and quantum mechanics
because if they have a nonzero mass then
they can exist as three different
flavors and they can convert from one to
the other it's possible for them to flip
backwards and
forwards this is a curious uh
consequence of quantum mechanics it
relates to the fact that the empty space
is never completely empty of energy and
that you can uh see quantum some
fluctuations even in an empty region of
space um it uh based on the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle that says that
nothing can ever be absolutely precise
you can't have a precise amount of
energy uh for an infinitely long length
of time you can only increase the
accuracy or the limits on the energy um
and the shorter the time window the more
uncertain the energy becomes so for
brief periods of time these are able to
flip backwards and forwards and the Ice
Cube Observatory down at the South Pole
a cubic kilometer of ice with lots of
photo detectors in has been able to
detect neutrinos and been able to
measure the ratio of their masses
between them between the different
flavors now it's crucial here that we we
we've measured the ratio of the masses
we haven't actually managed to measure
the absolute masses of them yet they're
so small that the absolute number still
udes us but they can oscillate between
these different flavors and because they
can do that electron neutrino flavors
that are released by the
sun emerge from that Fusion process and
they stream outwards they're not slowed
down at all they're not blocked by the
overlying layers of the sun they come
out in all directions and they emerge
and we trap them in our detectors um but
as they do so they can start to flip
from one state to the other and so we've
got this wavy line diagram here showing
in yellow the electron neutrinos coming
from the Sun and as they travel
distances they can start to oscillate
backwards and forwards between the
different states so the yellow electron
flavor can turn into the U cyan colored
muon or even into the much heavier towel
flavored
neutrinos and so as a result If You
observe them at a long distance then you
tend to see a mixture of the flavors
once they've had time to get into this
Rhythm and
oscillation and
so when you make the detections you're
actually detecting a mixture of the
flavors and if your detector is using a
large vat of chlorine um then it only
detects them when they're in the
electron neutrino State and that's why
with the three flavors we were only
detecting onethird as many now in Canada
in Ontario at the kryon mine you've got
snowlab the sbis neutrino Observatory
and this uh was visited by Steven
Hawking a couple of times during his
lifetime and uh it's been used to detect
and measure these oscillations and
confirmed that the reason for the
homestead experiment not managing to see
enough neutros was because of this uh
flavor oscillation and it's able to
observe neutrinos not only coming from
the Sun but also from nuclear reactors
across the world and the advantage with
those is that as they are powered up and
turned down into their quiescent state
the Flux Of
neutrinos changes and we know when we're
doing that so we can correlate the
change in theed neutrino flux by this
amazing
detector with the change in power output
of the uh nuclear reactors and so we're
able to calibrate that very
nicely
so this tells us that there was actually
no reason for Steven to have needed to
solve the problem of the
uh sun and the lack of solar neutrinos
for any other reason and therefore we
pretty sure we don't need the sun to
have a black hole in the center now that
doesn't mean there isn't one there but
it does set upper limits on the maximum
size that it could be it can't be
responsible for 2/3 of the power output
otherwise we just wouldn't see as many
neutrinos of all flavors as we do if
there is one there it must be pretty
small perhaps not a large sort of uh
object but a tiny little object the mass
of a
mountain and that's still a
possibility and of course there are lots
of other stars and so the question is
can we find any other stars where we can
detect strange things going on and the
energy budgets not matching up and
perhaps there being signs of a Hawking
star well it really depends on where we
were going to get our black hole from as
well as to whether or not there are
enough black holes in the universe to
make this reasonably common or whether
it would be freakishly unlikely for such
an object to form and one candidate for
this are small black holes formed back
during the Big Bang the so-called
primordial B uh black holes in the Big
Bang the matter would have been
compressed together in a hot dense State
very high temperatures packed together
very tightly and maybe small knots of
material could get sufficiently tightly
packed to have formed themselves into
black holes rather than coming from the
usual method that we understand in terms
of dying giant Stars crushing their CES
to form a black hole Maybe the Big Bang
created a whole range of different
masses of uh black holes uh and
Scattered them Across the Universe and
perhaps there were enough of these
perhaps
smaller um sized objects of the mass of
an asteroid perhaps uh that formed these
primordial black holes and could get
captured into the center of
stars we know of course that Galaxies
have black holes at the center and it
may well be that those primordial black
holes seeded the formation of uh black
holes in the middle of galaxies that
grew to the super massive size and the
galaxies forming around them so it's not
an unprecedented
idea and well the problem with detecting
it inside a star is that overlying
material blocking our view um L
Bellinger from Yale here said Stars
harboring a black hole at their Center
can live surprisingly long and he even
said that our sun could have one as
massive as perhaps the planet Mercury in
the center without us noticing going
back to that idea
of a small black hole that doesn't alter
the properties of the overlying star too
much it's not going to be radiating more
energy than is uh normal for it um from
the Fusion processes and not have the
wrong Flux Of neutrinos and so
forth so if we had a primodial black
hole with a mass of a a mass a mass of a
mountain like Mount Everest or a small
asteroid this would be really tiny be
the size of an atom perhaps and this
means that its surface area The Event
Horizon through which material has to
fall to make it grow during the
accretion process is really tiny and
because material will as it spirals into
the gravity well of the black hole it
will get accelerated into an accretion
disc process get very very hot there'll
be a lot of radiation the temperature
will be tens of billions of degrees at
the boundary layer just outside the
black hole perhaps the radiation coming
from such an object will push away
material as fast as gravity is trying to
make it fall in throttling the accretion
process so that we can calculate that
perhaps a tiny black hole like this
couldn't eat more than 100 tons of
material every second 100 tons a second
is quite a lot but for a black hole with
the mass of a a large mountain it's not
a great growth rate and it would be very
very slow to grow in mass and turn into
a larger object object and the influence
that it would have the power output that
it would have on the star would be quite
modest and quite hard to detect until
that
star um evolved and then black hole got
larger and
larger the larger it gets the faster
it's able to accrete
material to the point where it might be
producing half the total power output of
the star then we would begin to notice
and the difficulty with really detecting
this is to find those stars that are
behaving in a slightly unusual
manner can we do that well you'll be
looking for those neutrinos that's
really difficult to detect for a star
that's a long way away we can do it for
the sun very much more difficult to do
it for um an ordinary star uh we've done
it for super noi that have exploded they
produce an absolute blizzard of uh
neutrinos and so we've been able to do
that but for ordinary Stars too
difficult so you'd really be trying to
look for just a a small percentage
increase in the amount of heat coming
from the object as the black hole grew
and that accretion process got more
violent in the
center and to measure the heat output of
a star and compare that with the
expected value of its mass you would
need to know the mass pretty accurately
uh to a few percent perhaps or better in
order to be sure and that's really
difficult but there is another way to do
this and that is to look for the sound
waves propagating around as a star Rings
like a bell socalled Astros seismology
this is a developing science been around
for a while and being able to do it for
sound waves the Sun and that has helped
us understand the insides of the sun we
also do it for the Earth seismometers
are used to track sound waves from
earthquakes and other
disturbances propagating in and around
this the uh layers of the earth and it's
through that that we understand about
the inner and outer cores of the earth
and their densities and what they're
made of and so if we could do this by
looking at the sound waves propagating
across the same the
surface of stars then we might be able
to use that to infer what's going on in
the middle and perhaps determine whether
there was any black holes in the in the
core this is incredibly sensitive or
it's got the potential to detect the uh
down to about a millionth of the mass of
the star and so we would definitely be
able to do this um to determine
it so what have we found have we got any
Hawking Stu STS well Steven died
unfortunately before this was proven and
they don't give out Nobel prizes for
things until the proof has been uh
brought forward so sadly this was
another case where one of Steven's
predictions was not held true in his
lifetime um he had the same problem with
the existence of uh black holes and
Hawking radiation and so forth but uh
again he was a very prodigious man
produced a lot of different answers so
far there are no known candidates for
this there's possibilities there's the
still the possibility that the sun might
have a very tiny black hole engine in
the center evolving away and that our
predictions of what will happen one day
are wrong but techniques will improve
and as we go forward hopefully we'll be
able to understand this better so maybe
I'll be able to produce an update to
this video at some point point in the
future and talk about some candidates
anyway thank you very much for listening
and I'll bring it to a close there